I hope you enjoyed learning about sparse autoencoders in the previous video.
I'm a big fan of using simulated data to learn about and explore advanced data analysis techniques.
For the reasons that I explained in the previous video, but there is no substitute for working with
real data.
There are uncertainties and challenges and other issues that real data force upon you that you can kind
of side skirt with simulated data.
Anyway, so the goal of this video is to show you what's involved in building training and interpreting
autoencoders with some text that I copied from Wikipedia.
It's a relatively small amount of text, so we shouldn't really expect a lot of beautiful, clean results
from the latent components.
But this is still a great opportunity to learn about sparse encoders.
And you're also going to learn about something called Palinka.
There's no new math for this video, so let me jump straight into the overview of the code demo.
Here is a screenshot of the Wikipedia page about Palinka.
Palinka is a sweet liquor that's made in several parts of Eastern Europe, in the Balkans, Greece and
Turkey, thereabouts.
It's something like a schnapps, and if you are ever in that part of the world, in particular Hungary
or Romania, then I can recommend trying a little bit with food.
But keep in mind that palinka can be pretty strong, and I definitely do not want to encourage drinking
too much of it.
Anyway, I have copied a handful of sentences from this wiki page, and that's what we're going to use
to train MLP neuron activations in a sparse autoencoder.
Here you see a screenshot of the autoencoder model that I am going to train.
Now, some of this code you have seen in the previous video, but I've also modified a couple of things
here.
For one, you can see that I have commented out the line that creates the decoder and instead down here
in the forward method here I multiply the latent layer by the encoder weights transposed.
So that means that the decoder is tied to the encoder.
The main reason I did that was to reduce the total number of parameters that we need to estimate for
this model, because we just don't have that much data to train the model.
And yeah, you know, if you're doing this for an actual research project, you'd want to use thousands
or tens of thousands of tokens for training.
And the texts that I use here, I think is 220 tokens.
So another added feature to this model is a parameter that here I call k.
This is another way to impose sparsity on an autoencoder model.
So you can see that I define k to be either whatever the input is or to be half of the input dimension
which corresponds to the number of tokens that we are processing.
And you can see the impact of this parameter k down here in the forward model.
So what I do is find the k largest activation values.
And then I zero out any activation that is less than those top values.
In other words I'm forcing lots of activation values to be zero.
So that imposes sparsity.
I will give a brief reminder of other parts of the model in the code demo.
So when I switch to code.
But that's the basics of what I've changed here.
So after training I will plot the loss functions.
Here you see the total loss, the sparsity loss and also the loss from what I call the decorrelation
loss.
This is the off diagonal covariance elements that you see down here.
I explained what this does in the previous video, although I didn't actually use this penalty term
in the model in the previous video.
You can see that this penalty term has a big effect in the beginning, and then it basically just does
its job by promoting independence among the latent components, and then once it pushes the model in
the right direction, initially, it doesn't seem like the penalty term really gets used that much anyway.
So now we have a trained model and we can start investigating what it looks like.
So this plot here on the left shows the percentage of tokens that have non-zero activations from all
of the latent components.
You can see that there's over 6000 components in the hidden layer, and the total activation matrix
is around 6.5% dense.
Now, this is not the same use of the term density as in sparse logistic regression from several videos
ago.
In that case, with the regression, the density referred to the coefficients of the model, so the
beta coefficients.
Whereas here.
Now with the autoencoders, I'm using this term density to refer to the number of non-zero activations.
So this block just shows the percent of tokens that have any activation over here in the middle you
can see what the activation values actually are.
They're all non-negative values.
And that's not something that I enforced is something that comes from the top k sparsity selection.
That is to say, I did select for large activations, but I did not select specifically for positive
activations.
That's just how it ended up working out okay.
And then over here is the non-zero activations by the percent of tokens that have any activations.
Of course the y axis values have a floor of zero and a ceiling of 100%.
So this plot ends up not being super insightful in the sense that it is fairly trivial that the more
activations there are, the stronger those activations are going to be.
But I thought it would be interesting initially, so I plotted it anyway.
Okay, so now we have over 6000 latent components.
What do we do with them and how do we know which of those 6000 are meaningful to interpret?
In the previous video I knew the ground truth, latent sources, so I could simply correlate the ground
truth data with the latent components and interpret the latent components that correlated best with
the simulated data.
But we don't have that luxury here because we don't know what the ground truth is.
We actually, you know, we don't know why how the model works.
That's kind of the goal of these analyses.
So instead what we can do is sort the latent components according to some of these metrics for example.
So for example we can find the component that has the most sparsity or the components that have the
largest activations.
I will show a few different ways of sorting and selecting components in the code.
Here you see heatmaps of text heatmap of activations for one of the components, and this one I selected
based on having strong activations.
Now if you look through the text at what gets highlighted the strongest, you can see that this latent
component seems to be selecting for something about geographical regions.
So words like Hungary, Hungary, Romania, Transylvania, Italy, regions, Hungary, Greece, Slovakia,
provinces, Austria, regions and so on.
So it does seem to get a lot of strong activations for countries, geographical regions, regions,
but it certainly doesn't activate exclusively to geographical regions.
For example, you also see some activation to a period and another period here, and local variations
and so on.
But actually inspired by results like this, I decided to create what I called a geography score.
That is, the average of the activations to the geography tokens divided by the average of the activations
to all of the other tokens.
And that's what you see here.
So a value of one would mean that the latent component has an equal amount of activation for geography
and non geography tokens and values above one mean that the model is more active for geography tokens
than non geography tokens.
Of course on average average across all 220 of these tokens.
And of course there's lots of zeros down here because there's a lot of sparsity.
Now I think this is a pretty interesting approach to picking out a component.
Although as I'll show you in the code, it turned out to be not as clean as we might like, but I suspect
that's due to the very small amount of data that we used for training and for calculating this score,
and of course, for training the autoencoder model.
Anyway, lots of interesting things to explore.
So I will now switch to Python Several libraries that we will need here.
And we definitely want to use the GPU for because we're training this model, the autoencoder model,
and it's pretty big, considerably bigger than the autoencoder model in the previous video and in the
code challenge in the next video.
We really, really want to use a GPU.
Okay.
So then here I import the GPT two, uh, the model and the tokenizer.
And here I'm setting up a hook to grab the MLP activations.
I get it from the fully connected layer before it goes through the jlu non-linearity.
The hook function is very simple because yeah, in this demo file I'm only going to hook one layer.
In the next video, we will hook all of the layers, which we've done multiple times before.
And here's something that I haven't done in a while, which is grab an output of this, uh, register
forward hook method on this model component.
And the reason why I'm doing this is because I'm going to delete this hook function.
So I'm going to use this handle to remove this function from the model.
We actually do not need to do that in this case.
But I'm just doing it as a reminder of how that works in case you need to use it in the future.
As you know, I typically do not do this because yeah, typically don't need to.
But yeah, just thought I'd be give you a little reminder of that.
Okay.
So here we have text again.
This is just copy pasted from this Wikipedia page which you can read further if you'd like to learn
more about Palinka.
Okay.
So yeah there are 220 tokens in total here.
I'm pushing the tokens through the model and here I am removing the hook.
Again.
This is not necessary uh, for this video, but yeah, just a nice little reminder.
Okay.
And then I grab the MLP activations, just printing out the size.
And then I push those to the GPU.
And why am I pushing these to the GPU?
Because these are the MLP activations that I am going to use to train the auto encoder model.
So the auto encoder will take these data as inputs and then do some fancy magical auto encoding stuff.
Of course it's not magic, but you know, gradient descent and etc. etc. and then produce an output
that will initially be just some random transformation of the input.
And then through gradient descent, the autoencoder will try to find a set of sparse transformations
that gets the output of the autoencoder to look like these MLP activations as closely as possible.
Okay, here is the code where I create the autoencoder.
So let me see.
I just want to highlight a couple of things.
So first of all about the decoder.
So yeah here instead of pushing this the output of the latent layer through a separate decoder set of
weights that would need to be trained by the model, I'm using the transpose of the encoder weights
and multiplying those by the output of the latent layer, which is what we get from here.
Again, this is a choice.
There is no real right or wrong.
But in general, if you don't have a huge amount of data to train the autoencoder, then it's often
beneficial to tie the weights because it means that you are reducing the number of parameters that the
model needs to learn through gradient descent, and that is the primary reason why I did it here.
Uh, of course you can try this with a separate decoder.
I think it will also work fine.
I do remember that when I was developing this code, when I was writing this code file, I tried it
with the decoder in.
I think I found that it was slightly better with the tide weights.
But anyway.
Okay, so here's this parameter k.
I've already described it in the slides as a quick reminder.
It determines the sparsity of the activations.
So k is either a parameter that we can provide as input or by default it will just take half of the
input.
And what does this mean.
This means that for example if we set this to be 0.5, so 50% of the input dimension of the 220 tokens,
110 of them will be zeroed out, the smallest activations will get zeroed out, and that will promote
sparsity.
That is going to force the model to learn a sparse representation of the data, as opposed to an overcomplete
and redundant representation of the data.
So again, you know, that's what you see here.
So here's the forward model.
I take the input data which are the MLP activations from one layer.
Push it through the encoder.
So the beginning and then I apply a non-linearity I think in the previous video I used Jlu and here
I use ReLU.
There's uh for very large models like language models.
It does seem to be the case that the Jlu non-linearity outperforms ReLU non-linearity.
It's not really clear if, uh, there is much of an advantage for smaller models.
And furthermore, ReLU is a little bit better than jlu at promoting sparsity.
And why is that the case?
Because remember that all of the negative activation values get completely obliterated.
They all turn to zero with ReLU.
Whereas with Gelu there actually is a little bit of a negative pass in the filter, which means that
with the ReLU activation you do get negative numbers.
They're just, you know, numerically closer to zero versus the original values that you pass in through.
Gelu.
Okay.
Yeah.
So ReLU promotes sparsity a little bit better than Gelu.
And sparsity is something that we are looking for in these kinds of models.
Okay.
So here I take all of the activations.
So these are the latent component activations I find the top k which is this parameter I just discussed.
And then I find the smallest of the top k values.
So the largest let's say 100 tokens.
And then I find the smallest of the largest tokens.
And then I create this mask here.
And I say where is any of the activations anywhere from any component and any token.
Where are those less than or in this case, greater than the threshold and those end up being ones.
And here I multiply that by this latent here.
Okay.
So what does that mean.
That means that I am preserving the strongest K activations and wiping out all the other activations.
But I'm not specifically saying which activations those are or which tokens they could be in or which
components they can be in.
So that is driven by the activation patterns in the model.
Okay.
So then we have the sparsity loss.
This I've already explained several times.
Here is the covariance penalty term which I described and walk through the code for in the previous
video.
So just as a quick reminder here, I look at the covariance across all of the latent components.
This tells me about the correlation patterns across the different pairs of components.
And then here I'm zeroing out the diagonal and then I just square the off diagonal elements.
The squaring is partly just to get rid of the negative covariances.
So essentially what this is doing is removing all of the or like mildly suppressing any of the relationships,
the linear relationships across the different components.
And what that does is help the model learn that the latent components should be independent of each
other.
Okay, so that's that.
And now here I'm creating an instance of the model and I'm pushing it to the GPU.
Okay.
So now we're ready for the training.
We use MSE loss here I have a learning rate of 0.0001.
In general, these autoencoders need a very gentle learning rate.
You don't want to push them too hard, too fast.
And then yeah, 100 epochs, which is fine for here in the code challenge.
In the next video, we will want this to be a little bit smaller just because the computation time gets
pretty long.
Okay.
And now we can train.
So the training is pretty straightforward.
We do the forward pass.
We get the different loss terms.
So the L1 sparsity loss the decorrelation loss and then the MSE loss plus the L1 plus the decorrelation
loss.
And that is the total loss here.
And then here I do backprop based on the total loss.
And here I'm just storing all the losses so we can visualize them a little bit later.
And then every 11th epoch I just print out how we're doing here and what the losses are and how far
along we're getting.
So let me start running that and then finally here after.
So you can see it goes very fast.
Uh, here after we train the whole model, then I run through the model once more to get.
I don't really care about the outputs.
These outputs should match pretty closely to the inputs.
Uh, and here is what I really want.
The latent layer.
This is what we are going to continue analyzing.
Now you might say that we don't need this code over here because we already have the data here from
the final run through the epoch.
That is kind of true.
But keep in mind two things.
One, on the final training run, we still do another final backprop call.
And that happens after this.
So the model is still going to learn a little bit after this final call to this model.
Secondly, um, if we have some features in the model like Dropout or BatchNorm, then we do not want
to apply those when we are grabbing the activations, the internal activations for analysis.
If what I just said is obvious to you, then that's great.
But this is a question that I get sometimes, so I thought I would mention it explicitly.
Okay, so now we see the shape of the latent layer activations is 220 for the tokens and 6144 for the
number of components.
So lots of latent components.
Yeah.
Here we see the losses.
I'm not really going to say that much about this.
Just that it drops down pretty nicely.
You can see from this plot that we don't really need 100 epochs.
Maybe we could use 100 epochs if we would lower the learning rate a little bit more.
But this is going to be my justification in the next video for training fewer epochs so we can save
some computation time.
Okay, here I'm just showing all of the latent activations and what you see here.
Let me actually reduce the color scale a little bit more.
So what you see here is that there's lots of vertical stripes right.
So this on the x axis is the latent components.
There's 6000 of them.
And here are the 220 tokens.
So what you see visually is that there are some components that respond a lot to all the tokens and
other components that just really yeah, maybe they respond a little bit, but they're just really not
very active.
So this is already visual evidence of some really great sparsity okay.
So now we can start having a look at what these components look like.
So here I'm calculating the density of each component.
And how do I do that.
So I start with this density mask.
This is a matrix of the same size as the latent activations.
So tokens by components.
And then I fill it in with a bunch of Nans.
And then what I do is replace any of the elements in this density mask with a value of one if they have
a non-zero latent activation.
So if there's any activation, then that becomes a one, and the rest of these values in here become
Nan.
So that is handy because I can use this function Nan sum.
So now I'm summing down all of the tokens for every component.
And then dividing by the number of tokens and then multiplying by 100.
So what is this going to be.
This is the percentage of tokens per component for which there was at least a little bit of non-zero
activation.
So for example you know imagine this component over here.
Maybe it's component 1900 or whatever.
This component did not give a single non-zero activation for any of the 220 tokens.
Then its value here would be zero.
On the other hand, maybe this component over here you can see this like slightly lighter stripe over
here.
Maybe this component responds with some non-zero activations to literally every single token.
So all 220 tokens, it had non-zero activation.
And so its score in this vector will be 100 for 100% of the tokens got some non-zero activation.
Okay.
And then so this is just the proportion or the percentage of tokens that had some activation.
We don't actually know from this vector what the activations were.
And that is what I do here.
So here I take the average of latent component times the density matrix.
And this is going to tell me of those non-zero components.
What was the average magnitude of the activation.
And I'm taking the average because or the absolute value before I take the average.
Because if there are negative values and positive values, I don't want that to average out to zero.
I just want to know what is the magnitude of the response to a given token.
Now, that said, I think you don't really need this with the amount of sparsity that I have forced
in this autoencoder because they all end up being positive anyway.
Okay.
So, uh, yeah.
And then I'm multiplying the latent density by the non-zero activations.
In the next video we are going to calculate these metrics over all of the layers.
This is just for one layer.
And then I'm actually also going to scale these values slightly differently.
Okay.
So then we can visualize these.
This shows the results that I showed in the slides.
So it's pretty interesting to see that a lot of the components were either not at all active or were
very active.
So a small.
So let me start that again.
So most components actually don't show any activation whatsoever because of the sparsity in position,
a relatively small number of components show activation to all or maybe nearly all.
Maybe, you know, over 97% of the tokens had activation.
And then we have some other activations in the middle.
If you would like this is not analysis that I ran, but if you find it interesting, maybe you can actually
break this up and see like literally count how many of these 6000 components had no activation to any
of the tokens, activation to all or maybe almost all.
And then how many were somewhere in the middle?
Okay.
Very good.
So what I'm going to do now is set up this heat map.
This is code to just identify the width of a letter in a figure.
This code you've seen before, This code you've also seen before.
So min max scaling some activation pattern and drawing the text.
And as a reminder here I'm also squaring the activation.
That just helps with the visual interpretation, because the large activations will be brighter and
the dim activations will be dimmer.
Okay.
Otherwise, this is mostly code that you've seen before, uh, in several earlier videos.
The main difference is that I put all of the code to draw the text heat map into a function.
And the reason why I do that here is because I'm going to sort and pick components.
And then I want to call that function.
Okay.
And did I run.
Yeah.
I also ran this one.
All right.
Let's see where we are.
Okay.
So here I am, uh, coming up with two sorting indices here.
I'm sorting by the activation of the so all the non-zero activations.
And here I'm sorting by the density of the latent components.
This is just a reminder of the size.
Okay, so now the idea here is I'm going to call that function that generates a heat map.
And we pick one of the components.
So let's start with this one.
Of course the autoencoder model is random.
So the fact that I'm picking 1 or 0 is not going to give me exactly the same results each time I run
this entire code file and retrain the sparse autoencoder.
So this is a component, a latent component that was just very active overall.
And here you see what kinds of things it liked.
So it likes Romania Hungary similar Czech Republic Greece.
So it kind of seems like it uh, this component like of course I'm using the word likes in this very
personified incorrect, uh, loose colloquial sense.
Uh, but this component, uh, Responded a lot to countries, but also to PD for in PD.
Oh, I'm not sure what that even means.
Uh, distilled periods pulp.
It responds a lot to pulp and so on.
So it's not doesn't seem like it's really specific.
It likes fruit juice, for example.
Okay.
Let's look at some other components.
Here we see component ten.
Uh this one seems to like protected and PD.
Initially I thought this might be you know, it likes words that start with a capital P, but that's
also clearly not the case by the way, as you get to later and later components.
Uh, here this one.
Yeah.
Has a seems to respond strongly to a couple of words.
They get a little bit less sensible.
But also eventually you're going to run into this kind of thing where you get a warning message and
this is all gray.
And what does that mean?
That means that this component 1000 was all zeros.
It did not respond to anything.
So uh, there's so there's nothing to plot and that you're going to see as you get, uh, later, though,
the first couple of hundred components, this one is really sparse.
The first couple hundred components will have lots of non-zero activations.
And then eventually you get to the part of the, uh, latent components, the sorted latent components,
where they really just have no activations whatsoever.
It's hard to know how to interpret these.
Right.
So maybe you look at this and you say, oh, this likes Parentheticals, right?
It's the, uh, the opening and the closing of a parenthesis, but you don't see the same pattern here.
And that's inconsistent with this strong activation here.
So it is certainly not the case that every component is intrinsically interpretable.
Uh, on the other hand, it is the case that the more data you throw into these models, the more you
can train these models, the more likely it is that you will get interpretable components.
Okay, so the last set of analyses I will show you is looking for geography related words.
So I looked through all of this text and I picked out the words that seemed to correspond to something
about geography.
Uh, and yeah, that's, uh, these terms here.
And then what I do is basically just come up with this, uh, mask where, uh, for all of the 220 tokens,
they are true if they are geography related and false if they are non geography related, which means
not fitting into this list of terms.
And then I loop through all of the components and I calculate this score here.
So it is uh the uh average non-zero activations for the target words divided by the average of the non-zero
activations for the non-target words.
And I put that in this if statement over here, just to say that this is filtering out any components
where there's no activations at all.
So these really like completely sparse components that have no activations.
Otherwise you're just going to end up dividing by zero and just getting a bunch of noise.
Yeah.
So here we see this geography selectivity score here.
So these couple of components up here they seem to respond more to tokens related to geography versus
non tokens okay.
So then I sort those and I can plot for that.
This is a great example because it shows where a very simple measure like this, without any real deeper
investigation or more carefully done analyses can really lead you astray.
So it shows the importance of inspecting and being critical of your analyses.
So this score, this component must technically have a high g G0 score.
But what does that mean?
Probably it responded a lot to regions.
So this had some non-zero activation.
And I suspect that all the rest of these tokens with three exceptions, are zero.
So technically this one does get a bit higher, but it's not necessarily that meaningful because of
the sparsity.
Similar here we get Czech Republic and Union, but we also get naught.
That has a really strong activation.
Let's see here I'm just poking around geographical.
This really likes the word geographical.
And yeah Hungary fruit and those.
Yeah I'm not sure what to make of these.
Sometimes you get some more sensible results, sometimes you don't.
In part this just also depends on how well the autoencoder model actually does.
Right.
So you could try rerunning this code a couple of times until you get a smaller loss function closer
to zero, and then you can interpret that model.
If you have worked with autoencoders before, then I'm pretty sure you will agree with me that they
are very cool and very interesting, but they can also be kind of tricky to work with.
That is especially the case here because of the relatively small amount of data, and also because of
the challenges of picking a component to focus on.
And actually picking a component in these kinds of latent source analyses is quite tricky.
It's certainly not unique to sparse autoencoder models.
In the next video, we are going to continue exploring sparse autoencoders, but at like a higher level
of granularity.
And that will allow us to examine some sparsity characteristics over the different layers of a language
model.
I will see you then.